# Bio5488 SP2026: Assignment 11

### Massively Parallel 5' Splice Site Analysis

**Due Date:** Friday, 4/10, 11:59 PM  

**Last Modified:** 01/07/2026

---
## Overview

The objective of this assignment is to gain proficiency in analyzing functional genetic assays. In this case, we will use a portion of a published dataset 
(Wong, et al., “Quantitative Activity Profile and Context Dependence of All Human 5' Splice Sites”, Mol. Cell. 2018 Sep 20;71(6):1012-1026.e3 at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30174293/).
But we will imagine that the data is part of your hypothetical thesis project studying 5’ splice site mutations in BRCA2. The processed data was obtained via the MAVE-NN package, 
as described here: https://mavenn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/dataset_mpsa.html. If you want to see the Python code used to process the raw data, visit that link.

Mutations that affect splicing are among the most common non-coding pathogenic mutations. But it is difficult to predict whether a mutation in a splice site will alter splicing, because human genes contain many noncanonical splice sites that lack the consensus sequence yet are spliced effectively. Intron 17 of BRCA2 contains an unusual ‘GC’ 5’ splice site sequence CAG/GCAAGUUU, which has a C at the +2 position rather than the more typical U. Pathogenic mutations at positions near the GC have been found in cancer samples, but it is unclear what the rules are that determine whether a splice site variant is functional.  

Imagine that you are studying splicing mutations in BRCA2. To discover what sequence patterns are necessary for functional splicing, you conducted a massively parallel splicing assay (MPSA) by testing all 32,768 possible sequences with either GU or GC at the +1 and +2 positions. (See Figs 1 and 2 for illustrations of splice site positions.)  9-mer NNN/GYNNNN sequences were placed at the beginning of intron 17 of a BRCA2 minigene. 20 nt barcodes were used to identify the upstream splice sequence. The MPSA measured whether exon 17 was included in the reporter transcript. After conducting the experiment, you calculated percent spliced in (PSI) as your quantitative measurement of function. PSI for a particular sequence is the percentage of detected barcode reads that included exon 17, and it is normalized to the consensus splice site. (If a splice site variant was correctly spliced as frequently as the consensus site, then its PSI = 100%.) For details, see the paper.  

--- 
## Reminders
Always remember to use an interactive job to run command-line tools (e.g., python, bowtie2, bcftools)
on the RIS. Once you submit an interactive job, you must activate your conda environment to use the
tools and dependencies within the docker image. 

```bash
$ bsub -Is -q workshop-interactive -G compute-workshop -a 'docker(takinwe1/bio5488:0.0)'
/bin/bash
$ conda activate bio5488
```
---
## Introduction
Copy all files from the hw directory to your home driectory or your work directory. Make sure you move your final to the submissions folder! 
You are provided with the following files: 
- `mpsa_analysis.py` Python script to complete
- `mpsa_data.csv` MPSA data file
- `brca2_mutations.txt` Text file of sequences of pathogenic BRCA2 splite site mutations

Use these files, the material in this document, the TA slides, and the commented instructions in mpsa_analysis.py, to complete the code and answer the questions.  
Because this is an exploratory analysis, I recommend trying out your code in an interactive environment such as jupyter notebook. Then, paste your completed code into mpsa_analysis.py and run it to complete the assignment.  

**NOTE**: This assignment requires the `numpy` and `pandas` python packages

---

### Task 1: Complete helper function
Complete ss_to_string as instructed in the script. This function converts 5’ splice site coordinates to python string coordinates. Your sequences are represented in python as strings but you consider splice site coordinates in your analysis (See slides for visual). The function ss_to_string will ensure that you can easily convert coordinates without careless math mistakes.  

### Task 2: Examine the distribution of PSI values. 
Recall that splicing efficiency in the MPSA is measured as percent spliced in (PSI). Your next task is to look at how PSI values are distributed in the dataset. You could plot the data, but for this assignment we are interested in the number of sequences that fall within each PSI decile. In other words, how many sequences have a PSI of 0-10%, 10-20%, etc.?

In your script, write code to create a list with 10 numbers, representing the sequence counts in each PSI decile. Print that list as output. You may work with the suggested code in the script or choose your own approach. Note that the data is stored in the pandas dataframe df, which is read in at the beginning of the script. Once you’ve written your code, write your answer to the question below into your README.txt file. NOTE: Deciles here refer to ranges in PSI scores, and not percentiles of the distribution. For example, the ‘lowest decile’ means PSI scores that are between 0 and 10%. It does not mean the lowest 10% of all sequences, whatever the PSI scores are. Due to experimental noise, some sequences have a PSI greater than 100%. These are assigned to the top (90-100%) decile.


**Question 1**: Looking at the distribution of scores by PSI decile, into which two deciles to most PSI sequences fall? What does this result suggest about the efficiency 5’ splice sites? 


### Task 3: Examine the distribution of PSI scores for sequences with non-canonical ‘GC’ splice sites.  

Human splice sites typically have ‘GU’ at the +1 and +2 positions, forming a perfect match with the U1 snRNA that hybridized to the 5’ splice site. But many introns, including BRCA2 intron 17, have a non-canonical GC. How does the distribution of PSI scores for ‘GC’ sequences differ from the distribution of the data as a whole. Recall that the MPSA library was designed so that half of all sequences were ‘GC’ sites. So naively we’d expect about half of all sequences in the top PSI decile to GC sequences. Is that the case?  Complete code in the script to (1) extract the sequences with GC +1,+2 sites and (2) determine their distribution among PSI deciles, just as you did for the entire dataset in Task 2. Then answer question 2.  


**Question 2**: Consider the number of ‘GC’ splice site sequences that fall into the top decile. Are ‘GC’ splice sites more or less likely than ‘GU’ splice sites to be spliced with 90-100% efficiency? What fraction of the splice sites in the top PSI decile are ‘GC’?  

### Task 4: Look over GC sequences in the top decile.
You should have noticed that very few of the GC sequences are in the top decile, which suggests that these non-canonical 5’ splice sites require other key nucleotides for efficient splicing. In the paper, the authors found that a G at the -1 and +5 positions together were correlated with high PSI. You task is to visually inspect these sequences and count how many have G at both the -1 (third from the left) and +5 (second from the end) positions. 

Complete the code in the script to display the GC sequences that have a PSI above 90%. Then answer question 3.  


**Question 3**: What fraction of the GC sequences in the top decile have G’s at both -1 and +5 positions? Sequences with G’s at -1 and +5 make up about 6% of all possible sequences. Are these sequences enriched in among sequences in top PSI decile?  


### Task 5: Examining pathogenic BRCA2 splice variants.  
Because the authors tested all possible 5’ ss sequences in the MPSA, they can check the splicing activity of any known pathogenic variants to see whether they manifest low splicing efficiency in the assay. They checked a list of pathogenic 5’ ss variants in BRCA2, though these could come from any intron in the gene, not just intron 17. Your task is to calculate the PSI deciles and the mean PSI of the pathogenic variants. Complete the code in the script to (1) read in the list of pathogenic sequences from `brca_mutations.txt`, (2) pull out their PSI scores from the dataframe df, (3) calculate and print out their distribution among PSI deciles (as you did in Tasks 2 and 3), and (4) calculate the mean PSI for these pathogenic variants. Then answer question 4.  

**Question 4:** A) Of 41 pathogenic mutations, what fraction have PSI scores in the top decile? In the entire MPSA dataset, 1.7% of sequences have scores in the top decile. Why would the mutation set differ in this fraction? (B) Among the wild-type versions of the pathogenic variants, the mean PSI score is > 99%. What is the mean PSI among the pathogenic variants?  

---
## What to turn in
**Make sure you're in the submission folder!** `/storage1/fs1/workshops/Active/BIO5488/SP2024.L41.BIOL.5488.01/Assignments/week 11/Submissions/<User_name> `

Submit these three things:
1. A completed `mpsa_analysis.py`
2. A readme file that contains the command to execture the script & the output of your file. Copy and paste the standard output from the terminal into your readme file or run your file and redirect the output to a file. For example,
   ```
    python3 mpsa_analysis.py > output.txt
   ```
3. The  `output.txt` file

   
That's it! Good job!



