# Bio5488 SP2025: Assignment 9

### Variant Analysis

**Due Date:** Friday, 3/28, 11:59 PM  
**Last Modified:** 2/27/2025

---
## Overview

The objective of this assignment is to gain proficiency in analyzing potential pathogenic variants derived
from genome sequencing data. To commence, it is essential to procure sequences from the SARM1
gene in patients’ cohorts.

Refer to https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/howtos/query.html for tutorials on bcftools

Always remember to use an interactive job to run command-line tools (e.g., python, bowtie2, bcftools)
on the RIS. Once you submit an interactive job, you must activate your conda environment to use the
tools and dependencies within the docker image. 

```bash
$ bsub -Is -q workshop-interactive -G compute-workshop -a 'docker(takinwe1/bio5488:0.0)'
/bin/bash
$ conda activate bio5488
```
---
### Part 1: VCF Header

Copy the VCF (`example.vcf.gz`) and index (`example.vcf.tbi`) files into your working directory.
Unzip the VCF file using the gunzip command to expand the file and use the less command to view the
uncompressed VCF.

```bash
$ gunzip example.vcf.gz
```

**Questions:**

A. Which GATK version is used in this dataset?

B. How many samples are there in this VCF file? Please write down the bcftools command you used in the README.txt file.

C. Which reference genome is used in this VCF file? 

---

### Part 2: VCF Contents

**Questions**

A. What is the chromosome number and position of this variant? Please write down the bcftools
command you used in the README.txt file.

B. What is the alternative allele of this variant?

C. What is the reference allele of this variant?

D. What is the count of different genotypes present for this variant? Please print genotypes out and
calculate the number for each genotype. In the README.txt file also write the bcftools
command you used. 

---

### Part 3: Variant Information Based on gnomAD v4.0.0

gnomAD website: https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/

A. In which gene does this genetic variant lie?

B. How many alternative alleles are present in the gnomAD v4.0.0 database?

C. What is the overall minor allele frequency in the gnomAD v4.0.0 database?

D. What is the variant type? (pLoF/missense/synonymous)

E. Have any human diseases been reported to be associated with this gene’s mutations? Do you
believe that this variant is pathogenic to the disease? Utilize information from ClinVar to make
your judgement. Additionally, what is the known functional role of this gene according to the
literature? 

---

### Part 4: Two-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test

Utilizing all gnomAD samples as controls, conduct a case-control burden analysis by employing a twotailed Fisher’s exact test. This is a basic, unadjusted variant association test that can determine
whether this variant is likely associated with the disease status. 

Please provide your python script (`fisher_test.py`) as well as the odds ratio, 95% confidence
interval, and p-value. Your script must be able to print the following information to the screen:
1. Odds ratio
2. P-value
3. Upper limit of 95% confidence interval
4. Lower limit of 95% confidence interval

---

### What to turn in:

• `README.txt`
• `fisher_test.py`