# Bio5488 SP2026: Assignment 8

### Genetic Variation

**Due Date:** Friday, 3/20, 11:59 PM 

**Last Modified:** 1/07/2026

---
## Overview
In this assignment, you will profile genome variation information and attempt to answer biologically
relevant questions. The variant call format (VCF) is a generic text file format for storing genome
variation data such as SNVs, indels, and structural variants, together with rich annotations. It contains
meta-information lines, a header line, and then data lines each containing information about a position
in the genome. The format also has the ability to contain genotype information of samples for each
position. A VCF file is usually stored in a compressed manner and can be indexed for fast data retrieval
of variants from a range of positions on the reference genome. For more information, please read the
VCF guide available on the GATK website:

https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035531692-VCF-Variant-Call-Format

You’ve been provided with two VCF files where low quality variants and variants affecting the scaffolds
and the mitochondrial genome have been filtered out. The VCFs contain:
1. Small genome variation (SNVs and indels) in `SNV_indel.biallelic.vcf` and
2. Structural variation (SV) in `sv.reclassed.filtered.vcf`. Variants have been classified as
large deletions (DEL), tandem duplications (DUP), inversions (INV), mobile element insertions
(MEIs) and “unknown” variants that are described by two or more “breakend" (BNDs) records
(one for each breakpoint).

The variant calls are from a large family, one of whom (NA12878) has been sequenced and analyzed
countless times and has been awarded the notorious title of “The Most well studied Genome in the
World”. The SNV/indel VCF file was generated using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) and the SV
VCF file was generated using the Hall Lab pipeline (Lumpy & SpeedSeq).

**DO NOT copy the VCF files to your assignment folder; instead, use a symbolic link.**
```
ln -s source_file myfile
```

For simplicity, this assignment is divided into two parts:
1. In Part I, you will profile the various types of genomic variation in the NA12878 individual,
including SNVs, indels, and SVs.
2. In Part II, you will focus on small genome variations like SNVs and indels of a trio.

---
## Reminders & Start Guide

**Always** remember to use an interactive job to run command-line tools (like python, bowtie2, bedtools) on the RIS. Once you submit an interactive job, you must activate your conda enrivonment to use tools and dependencies within the docker image. 
 ```bash
 $ bsub -ls -q -workshop-interactive -G -compute-workshop -a 'docker(takinwe1/bio5488:0.0)' /bin/bash 
 $ conda activate bio5488
```

 If the command line returns a CondaError when you attempt to activate the conda environment, you can hardcode the path to the tool. Ex:
 ```bash
/opt/conda/envs/bio5488/bin/python3
/opt/conda/envs/bio5488/bin/bowtie-2
/opt/conda/envs/bio5488/bin/bedtools
```

 Set the path to the class Assignments directory:
```bash
classDir=/storage1/fs1/workshops/Active/BIO5488/SP2026.L41.BIOL.5488.01/Assignments
```
View the contents:
```bash
$ ls -vlh ${classDir}
$ ls -vlh ${classDir}/*
```
Navigate to your working directory:
 ```bash
$ cd ${classDir}/A06/Users/<WUSTLKEY>
 ```


 ## Instructions
 ---
 ### Part 1
 With the provided VCF files `SNV_indel.biallelic.vcf` and `sv.reclassed.filtered.vcf`

 **Step 1:** 
Write a python script, `count_gv.py`, to count the different classes of genome variation (SNVs,
small indels, as well as larger structural variants) for the individual NA12878. The script should read
in both files and output a table with the names and numbers of non-reference alleles belonging to
different variant classes, i.e. SNVs, indels, large deletions, tandem duplications, inversions, MEIs and
BNDs. (For BND type variant, 2 BND calls represent one variant) [You might want to read in the files
line by line, to avoid disasters.] Make sure to write doc string and usage. Exit the script if wrong number
of parameters were given.

The usage of the script will be:

```bash
$ python3 count_gv.py <SNV_indel VCF> <SV VCF>
```

**Question 1:**

What is your output from the above run?

**Question 2:**

Using the numbers of variants reported in Question 1 for each variant class for NA12878, what
proportion of genomic variants are SVs?

**Question 3:**

Describe the spectrum of genome variation for the individual NA12878

**Step 2:**

Modify `count_gv.py` to plot the length distribution of small indels (output file:
`histogram_indels.png`), large deletions (output file: `histogram_deletions.png`) and MEIs
(output file: `histogram_meis.png`) observed in NA12878. Label your axes (include units), choose
appropriate scaling, and give your plots descriptive titles. Remember to place these plots in your
submission folder!

The usage of the script will continue to be: 

```bash
$ python3 count_gv.py <SNV_indel VCF> <SV VCF>
```

**Question 4:**

a) Describe the distributions.

b) Speculate how the length distribution might differ if we limit the data to exonic indels?

---

### Part 2

Homozygous SNVs are those where both copies of the chromosomes of the sample genome have the
same allele which is different from the reference genome. If the two copies of a sample’s chromosomes
have different alleles and one matches the reference and one does not, this would an example of
heterozygous SNV. Refer to Dr. Jin’s lectures for more information on genotype nomenclature.

**Step 1:**

Write a python script, `quantify_genotype.py` , to quantify the number of homozygous and
heterozygous SNVs and indels, for the individual NA12878. Count the total number of genotype calls
that are homozygous reference, heterozygous, and homozygous alternate for that individual. Also count
the number of genotype calls with one or more alleles missing. Report it in the form of a table with the
four possibilities and their corresponding counts. Remember to write doc string and exit script if wrong
number of parameters were given.

The usage of the script will be:

```bash
$ python3 quantify_genotype.py <SNV_indel VCF>
```

**Question 5:**

What is the output from running Part II’s Step 1?

**Question 6:**

Given the number of homozygous alternate (or non-reference homozygous) and heterozygous SNVs
and indels you found, does the difference in the numbers make biological sense? Why, or why not?

***You shall now focus your analysis on the NA12891-NA12892-NA12878 trio***

**Step 2:**

Write a python script, `violate_MS.py` , to count the number of variants that clearly violate the
rules of Mendelian segregation, given the trio’s relationships to one another. (For simplicity, only
consider autosome in this assignment, but in reality, autosomes and sex chromosomes are all
important.) The usage of the script will be:

```bash
$ python3 quantify_genotype.py <SNV_indel VCF>
```

**Question 7:**

How many variants clearly violate the rules of Mendelian segregation?


**Question 8:**

Describe four potential reasons that could explain these violations.

---

The above analysis does not consider the quality of the genotype. Generally, it’s best to filter variants
based on genotype quality score to reduce the number of false positive variants. (Your answer for
question 7 hopefully describes some of the justifications for this filtering step.) You will attempt to make
your calls stringent by filtering based on genotype quality scores. 

Each line, or record, of a VCF corresponds to one variant. Column 9 of the VCF gives the format for
how the genotypes of each individual are reported in that record. For example, genotypes may be
reported as a set of fields in the format GT:AD:DP:GQ. Other formats in other records may include
other fields, but fields are always separated by a colon. The GT field refers to the genotypes called as
0/0, 0/1, or 1/1 for homozygous reference, heterozygous, or homozygous alternate. AD gives the depth
at which each allele was called (one depth for homozygous calls, two depths for heterozygous calls).
DP gives the total read depth, i.e. the sum of the AD values. Finally, GQ refers to genotype quality, which
is reported on the Phred scale. 

Unfortunately, some individuals may be missing certain values that are given in the format
column. Missing values may be represented by a period (e.g. ‘.’ for a single value or ‘./.’ for
missing alleles in the GT field) or may not appear at all if they are at the right end of the format fields.
However, if GQ is the fourth field in the format for a certain record, then you can be sure that any
individual who has a GQ value will have it reported in the fourth field. (Note that GQ may not be the
fourth field in the format for all records.)

**Step 3:**

Modify `violate_MS.py` to filter variants such that you only keep records in which all three
individuals in the trio have GQ scores at or above a given threshold. If any of the three are missing GQ
values or if any value is below the threshold, that record should not be kept. If the user does not
provide a threshold, the script should not filter the variants. (For simplicity again, only consider
autosome) The usage of the script will now be:

```bash
$ python3 violate_MS.py <SNV_indel VCF> [GQ threshold*]
```
*default: no thresholding based on genotype quality score

Run your modified `violate_MS.py` on the trio data with a GQ threshold of 20.

**Question 9:**

How many variants *now* violate mendelian segregation?

---

## What to turn in

A completed `README.txt`
Commented scripts:
- `count_gv.py`
- `quantify_genotype.py`
- `violate_MS.py`
Figures appropriately scaled with labelled axes and informative titles:
- `histogram_indels.png`
- `histogram_deletions.png`
- `histogram_meis.png`


